Once around anti-stars.
So this was something that hit the news
recently and I just wanted to talk about
it.
We should start by saying some words
about matter and antimatter.
Everything that we see around us in the
ordinary course of our existence is made
of ordinary matter with atoms made with
positively charged nuclei and clouds of
electrons orbiting around them. But
there is another kind of matter out
there very rare in the common world
called antimatter which is the mirror
opposite where the nuclei are negatively
charged containing anti-rotons
and the anti-electrons which we also
call posetrons. They have their own name
because they're so important are
orbiting around the creating anti-atoms.
And we would call an anti-atto with one
proton one anti-roton in the center and
one anti-electron posetron orbiting
around it an anti-hydrogen atom. But you
can create heavier anti-atoms.
Next would be anti-h helium and then
anti-thium and so on. In theory, all
such things are possible and it would be
very very hard to tell the difference by
looking at them because the orbits of
the posetrons would be the same as the
orbits of the electrons in the ordinary
matter and the energy levels would be
identical and the transitions between
them would be identical. And so the
light, the photons of light would have
the same energy, frequency, and
wavelength. It would be impossible to
tell remotely which you were looking at.
Um, now we have managed to make some of
these in particle accelerators. We've
certainly quite good these days at
making anti-hydrogen and we've even made
some anti-helium in the latest results
from some of the particle colliders.
Now
antimatter is also famous of course for
being able to annihilate with ordinary
matter. You get matter and antimatter
together and they will cancel each other
out and release their entire mass energy
in a burst of gamma radiation via the
equation E= MC^². So all the mass m of
both particles is converted into pure
energy. Um so if you had some antimatter
it would be a tremendous source of power
and energy. Uh a great fuel for a
starship perhaps and also uh a terrific
way of making a very dangerous bomb. So
perhaps it's good that we don't have
very much of it.
When that happens, particularly with
electrons and posetrons, anti-electrons
annihilating with each other, you get a
very specific amount of energy because
the total mass of both particles is
converted into energy. You get 511 kilo
electron volts. An electron volt is the
amount of energy that an electron would
gain accelerating across a potential of
a volt. And you get 500,000 of those if
you turn a pair of electron and
anti-elect electrons into pure energy,
destroying all their mass and releasing
it as as pure energy. And the diagram on
the right is our galaxy spread out
across the sky in a whole range of
different wavelengths. I think it's a
very interesting way of looking at it
from 21 cm hydrogen radio waves through
to gamma rays and in the center the 511
kilo electron volt gamma ray uh
emissions much of which is coming from
that very center of the galaxy and that
is associated with the uh material in
and around the very hot region where the
super massive black hole hole in the
center of our Milky Way resides. But
there are other hot spots throughout the
galaxy as well as we shall see and
indeed across the whole of the universe.
Now because it uh we can take uh
matter and antimatter, annihilate it and
produce gamma rays. And because the E=
MC^²
equation works both ways round, you can
actually take a pair of gammaray photons
and smash them together and out you get
an electron and a positron, an
anti-electron.
And we do that in particle accelerators
and cosmic rays do it in the upper
atmosphere all the time. when they hit
uh atoms this process creates a shower
of electrons and posetrons coming down
from the sky which then have further
interactions.
So we're we're quite good at being able
to do this and it's been well understood
since it was first predicted back in
around 1930 when Paul Dra was staring
into the his fireplace here in Cambridge
and came up with his famous Draq
equation which predicted the existence
of antimatter.
So it works both ways. You can use
energy to make matter and you can use
matter and antimatter to combine them to
get your energy back again.
But in the big bang, we had we think
pure energy to begin with and now we
have a whole load of matter. So what
happened? Well, we think that the energy
was converted into matter by energy
particles, photons crashing into each
other and creating pairs of particles,
matter and antimatter. But you should
have had equal amounts, equal numbers of
particles and antiparticles. So how come
we seem to have ended up in a world made
of matter and that there isn't much
antimatter around?
Well, it
thought that maybe there was a small
asymmetry and that it's as if one extra
matter particle was left over for every
billion pairs of matter antimatter
particles that were created and that the
majority of that billion reaniated
back into energy. Um and we think that
because of the ratio of matter to photon
energy flying around the universe uh as
we can measure in terms of things like
the cosmic microwave background
radiation. We think that the matter is
just a tiny leftover of one part in a
billion of the total energy that was in
the big bang itself. So all it would
take is that one in a billion
unsymmetrical nature to manage to create
the extra matter.
Now various particle physics experiments
and so forth have been done and we have
measured some small asymmetries but the
numbers still don't quite add up right.
So something very strange still to be
understood in all of this as to why an
exact we've got exactly the amount of
matter we have and not very much
antimatter.
But I want to float you you another
idea. One of Richard Fineman's.
And Fineman came up with his famous
Fineman diagrams of particles moving
through space and time and having
interactions
drawn as we have here as arrows. And on
the left hand side we have what looks
like two electrons. And on the right we
have a positron E+ and an electron E
minus. And we have the arrow of time
going up the diagram. So space is
represented horizontally, time
vertically.
And what Feman pointed out was that
these two diagrams are somewhat
equivalent.
In the right hand diagram, let's look at
the right hand diagram first. We perhaps
had a photon of energy coming in from
below forward in time up the diagram and
then collided with another one and out
came our particle antiparticle pair the
E minus and the E+ moving away from each
other and moving forward in time as a
matter and antimatter pair.
But you can look at it another way that
it what actually happened was that an
electron from the future
came in from the top left of the diagram
on the left hand side here and hit
something and rebounded forwards in time
turning itself around and becoming
observed as a real electron. And what
Fineman points out is that the
antimatter
equivalent of an electron, a posetron,
is exactly the same as an electron
that's traveling backwards through time.
It has the opposite properties, the
opposite electric charge, the opposite
spin in terms of the quantum spin that
it seems to have. This is just the
mirror image reflected reflecting all of
those charge par and time quantities
turns a matter particle into an
antimatter particle.
And so it's been suggested and uh I
dreamt this one up uh independently
actually. I was quite uh taken by the
idea when I saw that other people had
beaten me to it. um that perhaps what
we're seeing is that we live in a
universe of matter and that the Big Bang
created roughly equal amounts of matter
and antimatter and that in fact the
antimatter separated and went off in the
other time direction backwards in time
quotes before unquaxis.
and that uh the matter moved in the
positive time axis away. And I think
that's quite a cute idea. Now, we've
still got to explain why we've got a
billion times more photons than we had
matter particles in terms of the energy
budget of the universe. So, there's more
to say on this one, and this doesn't
necessarily uh answer all the questions,
but it's a nice idea.
So
maybe there's a different explanation,
which is that what we're looking at
across the universe isn't all matter.
Maybe there is some anti-atter out
there. Maybe there are anti-stars or
anti- galaxies where regions of the
universe that got separated from each
other started with over densities of the
other version of matter going in the
opposite direction in terms of its uh
spin and charge and so forth. And maybe
these were separated away from each
other by that original big bang
inflation and that they're just sitting
out there and that when we look at them
they look perfectly normal. The spectrum
of the light is the same. The magnetic
fields are the same. It would be very
hard to tell one from another.
Well, h interesting. What can we
possibly do to uh tell the difference?
Well, if they're very very far away and
separated physically from each other, I
suspect the answer is not much.
But we have the Fermy gammaray telescope
and this has been mapping gammaray
sources from the Milky Way and beyond.
You can see an artist's impression of
the Fermy scope or in orbit around the
Earth there. And a map of the galaxy.
The red is gamma ray emissions. And you
got lots of little red hot spots all
over the sky. Most of these are either
from feeding black holes or recently fed
black holes or spinning neutron stars,
pulsars, which also seem to be able to
accelerate um particles to the energies
needed to start creating matter
antimatter positron electron pairs that
then eliminate annihilate as uh 511 kilo
electron volt gamma rays. again.
So, what's going on? Well, Fermy
[snorts]
did a survey and it looked at nearly
6,5787
gammaray sources across the sky
and eliminated all but 14 of them as
being black hole black holes, quazars,
pulsars, that sort of thing. Things that
we now think we understand pretty well.
But it left 14 of them that seemed to be
in the Milky Way. So relatively nearby
compared to most of the others and that
had the 511
kilo electron volt signature of
antimatter annihilation
and were point sources. So are these in
fact anti-stars? stars made of
antimatter
floating around in our Milky Way.
Well, a hypothetical star made of
antimatter, it would look invisible
light just like an ordinary star would
look exactly the same. Same spectrum,
same energy levels in the atoms.
The gravity of it would act positively.
Antimatter doesn't have anti-gravity. It
still has positive gravity. still has
positive energy and so it uh
would create all of the same effects on
objects moving around it pulling
material inwards. It would have the same
charge
stirring creating magnetic fields in the
other direction perhaps but nevertheless
you wouldn't be able to tell.
But it would be pulling material in. And
if that material were ordinary matter
from the interstellar medium perhaps
then it would annihilate as it made
contact with the anti-ar surface.
The electrons would be falling in and
finding their way and bumping into
posetrons of your anti-star and bingo
511 kilo electron volt gamma rays would
emerge. So perhaps that is what we're
seeing. And statistically looking at the
number of these sources that we have
found across the Milky Way, it's as if
there's one in every 400,000 ordinary
stars turn out to actually be
anti-stars.
It's a little bit hypothetical, but what
other evidence could there be? Well, we
have had the AMS detector, a unit
mounted externally on the International
Space Station. There was AMS1 and then
AMS2
looking for antimatter
and it was detecting positrons and
anti-rotons in very large numbers. And
that doesn't surprise us because we know
the Van Allen belts of radiation around
the Earth contain quite a lot of
antimatter in the form of posetrons and
anti-roton. They're relatively easy to
generate. But it also detected
anti-helium
um including eight anti-helium 3 nuclei
and a number of anti-helium 4 nuclei as
well. And anti-helium
is very very difficult to account for
from ordinary sources of
uh cosmic rays and so forth. It just
doesn't make sense. So the only story
that we can come up with is that there
is some anti-atter around and possibly
that this is uh the remains of stellar
wind from anti-stars that has managed to
make its way across the galaxy and get
here. So this lends some weight to the
fermy uh detection of those 14
candidates across the Milky Way.
and those were launched. The AMS
detectors were launched uh in the last
15 or so years. Um in fact, a friend of
mine wrote some of the software that
went on uh AMS2 and was counting these
detections uh using uh an operating
system developed in Cambridge. So that
was an interesting little connection.
But just about to be producing results
is GAPS, the general antiparticle
spectrometer. And this is not a
spacecraft. It's a balloon. And it's
being launched around about uh now from
Antarctica. And it's looking for
antimatter in cosmic rays. and it's
aiming to try and confirm AMS's
detection of these anti-helium nuclei
because those numbers that we're talking
about just eight nuclei isn't really a a
very large statistical sample to say the
least. So it might not be right and uh
it'd be great if this can confirm it. Um
and it's looking like maybe there's more
antimatter around than we thought. So,
that's uh quite an interesting
development. I hope you've enjoyed that
very brief look at the hints that there
might be anti-stars even in our own
galaxy. Um, and I'll leave it there for
now. Thanks for listening.